We extend a warm welcome to all and are happy that you've joined us for the December 2018 program of JW Broadcasting.
During this program, you'll enjoy exciting and upbuilding scriptural talks delivered to the students and other attendees during the Gilead graduation held on September 8, 2018.
And this is just the opener.
Parts two and three of the Gilead graduation program will be released in the upcoming weeks.
In addition to motivating Bible talks, you'll get to know some of the students later this month when you watch another edition of the Inside Story.
But now, please enjoy part one of the graduation of the 145th Class of Gilead.
Well, what an exciting time this is to be here for the graduation of the 145th Class of Gilead.
Let's start by asking a question.
What makes a graduation program of Gilead different from the various graduation programs that people engage in right throughout the earth?
Well, I'm sure all of us would agree usually with regard to worldly institutions.
Graduation programs are all about the accomplishments and praise of individuals.
But as you dear students realize, the Gilead program, the training that you've received is all about glorifying Jehovah.
And that's why the theme of introductory comments are always seek Jehovah's glory and not your own glory.
And that's in harmony with what the scriptures tell us.
If you'd like to turn with me please to the book of Romans, Romans chapter 12.
And notice what verse 3 and 16 reminds us.
Romans 12, verse 3.
For through the underserved kindness given to me, I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than is necessary to think.
But to think so as to have a sound mind, each one has God has given to him a measure of faith.
Notice the point there, whatever we have has been given to us by Jehovah.
So we shouldn't think more of ourselves than is necessary.
And then verse 16, it reminds us, have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves.
Do not set your mind on lofty things but be let along with the lowly things.
Do not become wise in your own eyes.
Now we trust that you fully understand that admonition because your Gilead training has been helping you to strengthen your relationship with Jehovah.
And when we know Jehovah, we can't help but glorify him because we know any good things we have come from him.
But now as you graduate and you go either back to your former assignments or to new assignments, you may find various tests to this resolve that you have to always glorify Jehovah and not yourself.
Now what might be some of those tests?
Well, one is perhaps an obvious test.
Maybe you go back, maybe to your former assignment and the brother said, oh, you've changed.
You're so much better.
Well, that's humbling in itself, isn't it? You didn't realize how bad you were before you left.
And your knowledge, the illustration is the way your teaching seems so much better.
So now what's your reaction? Well, I'm sure you're not going to say, you're welcome.
I noticed that too.
I know and I'm sure all of us know that you'll be determined in a situation like that to bring glory to Jehovah and not to yourselves.
So perhaps that's the easy time because as obvious, we have to be careful.
But when is the other occasional situation where we may be tempted to show a measure of pride and glorify ourselves?
Well, it could be if people criticize us or perhaps don't show us the respect that we feel that we deserve or maybe we don't get the privileges that we hope to receive.
Now, that could be a temptation for us to remind everyone of the special training and the fact that you graduated from that training.
You see, this is similar to the trap that Job fell into.
Now, when we think of Job, we think of a very faithful man, a man of integrity.
The two words go together. Job and integrity.
But we also realize that Job needed to have very strong counsel.
Now, at what point in his life did he do something that warranted him getting counsel?
Well, let's think about it.
We won't read the verses because you know them well.
But in chapter 1, remember, Job lost everything.
His children, his possessions, one after the other.
But when we look at Job chapter 1 verse 22, it tells us there that Job didn't sin.
He didn't accuse God of doing anything wrong.
So all these horrific things happened to him.
He had these huge tests and he came out looking pretty good.
He hadn't sinned at that point.
So then what happened in the second round?
Well, you remember, he had this loathsome disease and then his wife said to him,
he had been cursed God and died.
So now, is that when he deserved some counsel?
No. In chapter 2 of Job, in verse 10, it tells us he didn't sin with his lips.
So at that point, he was winning, we might say.
He had proved himself an integrity keeper.
So when was it that he started to make a few mistakes that resulted in getting that strong counsel?
Back in 1980, it tells us.
It said it was when these three so-called friends started to criticize him and say,
maybe you did this, maybe you did that.
That's the reason.
Then the watchtower said, because of these false accusations,
it's as if it pushed Job over the edge and he vigorously determined to justify himself.
Even though that inferred that maybe Job wasn't treating him correctly.
So do we see this is a situation where if we criticize,
though some false accusations are made about us,
there are over suddenly self-justification can come in.
And what is self-justification, glorifying ourselves rather than glorifying Job.
Of course, our Lord Jesus Christ is an excellent example in that regard.
Let's have a look at the record recorded in John chapter 8.
John chapter 8, verses 48 through 50.
Now here we have a group of Jewish persons criticizing Jesus, falsely accusing him of something.
Notice there in verse 48.
In answer, the Jews said to him, that is, to Jesus,
now we're not right in saying, you are a Samaritan.
Now you remember, that's not a compliment.
And you have a demon.
And another occasion, he said, you're out of your mind.
But now what did Jesus do?
Did he fall into the trap that Job fell into and tried to justify himself?
No, he just made a simple comment.
In verse 49, I do not have a demon, but I honor my father and you dishonor me.
Then he says, but I am not seeking glory for myself.
There is one who is seeking and judging.
We see the excellent example of our Lord Jesus.
At that difficult situation where he was falsely accused, he still focused on glorifying Jehovah.
So what's the lesson, therefore, each one of us, not only yourselves, but all of us?
Well, you don't need to remind other people that you graduated a Gilead.
You don't need to try to impress others to get their respect.
And you don't need to praise yourself.
What should be the goal of all of us?
Well, our final scripture we want to share with you is, are the words of Jesus as recorded in Matthew.
Matthew chapter 5 and verse 16.
Likewise, let your light shine before men so that they may see your fine works
and give glory to your father who is in the heavens.
What a beautiful goal.
Yes, the goal is that we don't glorify ourselves, but we give all the glory to Jehovah God.
So with that in mind, we're going to look forward to our wonderful program.
We've got a number of brothers who put a lot of effort in thinking about what they would like to convey to you before you go to your assignments.
And the first of these brothers is brother John Echron.
The theme that he's selected is, what will you do in the year of drought?
You students are really like beautiful trees planted along the River Gilead.
Jeremiah chapter 17 and verse 8 describes such beautiful trees.
Let's read that together.
Jeremiah chapter 17 and verse 8.
It says, he will become like a tree planted by the waters that sends out its roots to the stream.
He will not notice when he comes, but his leaves will always flourish.
And in the year of drought, he will not be anxious, nor will he quit producing fruit.
Well, you've enjoyed the spiritual waters taught here at Gilead.
And as you graduate today and you go off to your assignments, your leaves are flourishing and you're producing fruit, figuratively speaking.
Now, did you notice, though, in verse 8, what the righteous trees had to deal with?
It says, when the heat comes and in the year of drought.
Now, it doesn't say not if the heat comes, but when the heat comes.
So, what is that heat and the year of drought?
Well, there are many forms of heat we deal with.
In addition to what you considered about this verse in class, I'd like to focus on one particular form of heat.
And that is persecution.
Restrictions on our work and bands are designed to create fear.
Negative articles in the media about Jehovah's Witnesses are designed to create doubt.
Religious leaders and opposers, they attack our neutrality, our clear support for the Bible's view of sex and marriage, or discipline by dispeloshipping and other matters.
And add to that that some of our brothers are being rounded up and thrown into prison, we can say that Satan has truly turned up the heat.
What will happen to the trees? Will fear and doubt cause them to shrivel up and die during the drought?
No. If you notice there in verse 8, Jehovah says the righteous will not notice the heat and not be anxious in the drought.
Well, why is Jehovah confident that the righteous trees won't notice the heat and won't whither up in the drought?
Look at verse 7 of Jeremiah 17. Is as blessed as the man who puts his trust in Jehovah, whose confidence is in Jehovah.
So what will you do in the year of drought? Trust in Jehovah.
You see, Satan wants to destroy our trust in Jehovah, right from the very first with Eve. Is it really so?
His whole system is built on fear, uncertainty, and doubt.
Persecution we could liken it to when you're in an airplane and it has some turbulence and it begins to shake.
One flight I was on, there was one woman that cried in terror. She screamed out loud every time the plane shook even just a little.
I mean, she was genuinely terrified. I felt sorry for her. But the experienced flyers, they were eating, reading, watching movies.
They didn't even notice the turbulence. Why? Well, from experience, they knew that the plane could easily handle such small amount of turbulence and they were not worried. It was designed for that.
Well, we are like experienced flyers. We don't let the turbulence or persecution of this system cause us fear or doubt.
With Jehovah and Jesus as our pilots, we don't need to be anxious, do we?
Let's consider two ways that we can show trust in Jehovah as Jeremiah 177 says. First, we're going to talk about trusting the faithful and discreet slave and trusting Bible principles.
Let's talk first about trusting the faithful and discreet slave. The faithful and discreet slave has been selected and appointed by Jehovah and experiences shown we can trust them.
You see, trust is built by repeated good experiences. Think of all the good experiences we've had with the faithful and discreet slave and following their direction.
Now, some might reason, well, you know, the direction from the faithful and discreet slave is good for the United States, but they don't understand here. They don't understand my assignment where I've been assigned.
We need to do things differently. Trust in the faithful and discreet slave is not geographical.
Jehovah's direction through the faithful and discreet slave applies to all of God's people all over the earth.
See, fear is really a loss of memory of what Jehovah has done for us.
Satan wants us to forget all the good experiences we've had with the faithful and discreet slave and let one moment of fear get to us and cause us to wither in the heat.
Second Thessalonians chapter 2 and verse 2 says, not to be quickly shaken from your reason, nor to be alarmed, especially at rumors.
Trust in the faithful and discreet slave is going to be put to the test. Satan will make sure of that.
It could be your own thoughts. I know better. Or maybe some twisted lies you read or hear. Either way, it's a trap.
Stay away from such ideas. Trust what you know about the faithful and discreet slave.
Isaiah 30-15 says, your strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust.
Remember, the faithful and discreet slave has been selected and appointed by Jehovah and our experience has shown that we can trust them.
Now let's consider trusting Bible principles or second point.
See, Bible principles are timeless pearls of wisdom from Jehovah.
But many people today attack our decision to live by Bible principles in this modern world. They say that's outdated.
However, we trust Bible principles because experience tells us they always work.
One sister asks, what helps her to be calm in very difficult or trying situations? And she said, give me a scripture.
Jesus' mother Mary had that same give me a scripture attitude. Luke 251 says that Mary made it her habit to keep these sayings in her heart.
See, Mary was really like a tree soaking in all of these waters of Jesus' teaching and his amazing miracles.
While the heat for Mary came when the Pharisees and Sadducees, maybe even her own family, their neighbors began to attack Jesus.
Call him names, slander his reputation and attack his motives.
What helped Mary to deal with the heat?
Those waters that she had treasured up in her heart.
What Bible principles and experiences are you keeping in your heart to help you when you come under attack?
Be like Mary and keep in your heart your good experiences in applying Bible principles.
Stick to what you know works, Bible principles. They always work and they never get out of date.
Not you or anyone else can come up with better principles to live by.
Remember, we trust Bible principles because they come from Jehovah and our own experience tells us they always work.
Now, trusting the faithful and discreet slave and trusting the Bible are just two of many ways that we can show that we trust Jehovah.
So what will you do in the year of drought? Trust in Jehovah.
Think of the birds. When they're flying high up there, are they worried, oh, I think I'm going to fall. I'm really worried.
Well, no, birds don't worry about that. Do they? Why? What will they rely on the wings and instincts Jehovah gave them? They can fly.
Likewise, we don't need to be anxious when faced with lies, bands, or attacks on our Bible principles.
Jehovah has given us what we need to fly, so to speak, the faithful and discreet slave, Bible principles, prayer, Holy Spirit, and more.
And we had further into the system as the heat from this system intensifies. Remember, fear and doubt are reactions.
But our decision is trust and courage.
Thank you very much, brother Echron. We really appreciated that. I neglected to mention that brother Echron is the help of the coordinators committee.
As Chairman, you'd probably appreciate. It's hard for me to take notes. There are a few other things I'm worried about.
But I did jot down a few things here. Drought won't make us doubt. Trust is a must. So hopefully I've got something I'll remember from brother Echron's talk.
Well, now brother William Turner, who is a help with the service committee, is giving us a challenging question. The theme is, have you become a different person?
Well, I think it's safe to say that with all of the training and restructuring instruction you received, you definitely are not the same individuals you were when you first arrived at Patterson.
But how exactly have you changed? And why is it important that you continue to do so?
Well, let's consider this by looking at someone who, just like you, received a special privilege. His privilege was being the first divinely selected king of Israel.
So the man was Saul. When Saul was anointed, the prophet Samuel gave him three prophetic signs in order to confirm that Jehovah was with him.
I invite you to start with me and your Bible, please, to 1 Samuel chapter 10. And as we read verse 6, note what was to happen after the last sign.
Chapter 10 verse 6 says, the spirit of Jehovah will empower you and you will prophesy along with him and be changed into a different person.
Now, what did this change mean? Would Saul, all of a sudden, become unrecognizable? Or would there be a drastic change in his personality?
Well, let's go back one chapter to chapter 9. In verse 21, here we get a glimpse of Saul's personality before he will appoint it as king.
Verse 21 says that this Saul answered, am I not a Benjamin Knight of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? Am I family the most insignificant of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin?
So why have you spoken to me in this way? So Saul shows himself to be a very humble, modest individual.
Well, how about after his appointment as king? Let's go back to chapter 10. If you look in verse 22, here we see Saul's introduction as king to the people.
Verse 22 says, so they inquired of Jehovah, has the man come here yet? Jehovah answered, there he is, hiding himself among the luggage.
So evidently, still modest, still humble. Interestingly, the inside book mentions that about a month after his appointment as king, Saul gained a couple of great military victories against the Ammonites and later against the Philistines.
So now you think about that. How did Saul change? And rather quickly, from bashfully hiding among luggage, to leading a nation to victory, that is evidence of the power of God's spirit, and the impact that it can have when one allows it to be operative in their lives.
So what's the lesson? All of you have manifested qualities that are very pleasing and useful to Jehovah.
It has allowed you to be productive in your assignment. It's allowed you to now have this privilege of Gilead training.
But as you now go to your assignments, you're going to continue to need to have that spirit operative in your life.
And just as we've seen in the case of Saul, that will not always mean a drastic change in your personality.
Perhaps when we think of that expression, someone becoming a different person, maybe that's where our mind goes, to someone who has come out of Satan's world, now into Jehovah's organization, and they put on the new personality.
And that's correct. But the reality is all Christians, even though spiritually mature, need to be adjusted from time to time.
And those adjustments can have a tremendous impact.
Perhaps your personality is such that you are naturally shy and reserved. Maybe you would be quite comfortable. No problem staying with the luggage.
But now, having God's spirit, coupled with appreciation for what you've learned, will now perhaps move you to come out of your comfort zone, to initiate ways to share things that you've learned with others.
Or maybe before you came to Gilead, you had very good leadership skills. You had to take charge for a personality one who got things done.
But now you may see the need to adjust. You recognize there is wisdom in perhaps slowing down, or even waiting, perhaps even seeking input from others.
You see, with the help of God's spirit, it can help you to become a kinder overseer, a better shepherd, one who's more tolerant, empathetic of others.
It's just tremendous benefits all the way around. But the extent that you become different depends upon you and your response to God's spirit.
Now, obviously, we know Saul's story. It does not end well. Instead of maintaining his reliance on Jehovah, he begins to trust his own judgment.
He focuses more on his position as king than he does with his relationship with God.
And it's quite interesting if you're still in chapter 10. If you look in verse 27,
when Saul had God's spirit, even when he encountered challenges, in this particular case, some questioning his appointment,
you notice Saul didn't feel the need to prove himself or challenge the men. He just stayed silent and focused on his assignment.
But you read a little later, when he lost God's spirit, when that bad spirit began to take over him,
and now the negative comments, the comments of others saw the strike down his thousands, and David's his tens of thousands.
Oh, well, now it's an issue. It's a problem. It affected his judgment, it affected his emotions, caused him to make bad decisions.
So what can help you to avoid that and to keep your focus?
Well, let's look at the example of the other Saul, this mentioned in the Bible, the man who later became the Apostle Paul.
Now we know obviously Paul's personality needed more than a refinement, Paul needed a complete overhaul.
But he truly became a different person by way of God's spirit, and he was given a privilege to serve as an apostle to the nations.
But if you turn to 1 Corinthians chapter 15, let's just note the attitude that Paul showed, 1 Corinthians chapter 15 verse 9.
He says, for I am the least of the apostles, and I'm not worthy of being a cold and a apostle because I persecuted the congregation of God.
But by God's undeserved kindness, I am what I am. Beautiful perspective, isn't it?
Now why do you think Paul was able to maintain this humble attitude for the rest of his life whereas King Saul could not?
Well, both men knew that it was only by means of Jehovah's undeserved kindness that they could enjoy their privilege of service.
But Paul never viewed his privilege of service greater than his relationship with God.
That's why he studied. He meditated. He discerned God's will for him, and then he was alert to follow the leadings of God's spirit.
And into the assignment Paul had challenges. You remember early on for parts of three years, some of the brothers didn't even believe he was an apostle.
But yet he never asserted his authority. He never distanced himself from his brothers.
He just loved them. He let his examples speak for him, and you can do the same.
See, let the brothers feel. Let them see the love that you have for Jehovah and the love that you have for them.
So in review, maintain those wonderful traits that qualified you for Gilead, like your modesty and humility.
And then study, meditate, continue to follow the leadings of God's spirit.
And when it becomes apparent that changes need to be made, either for the sake of the work or peace with your brother,
well, please be willing to make them.
And if you do, you will show that you have become a different person, one who is refined, one who is useful, one who is dearly loved by Jehovah.
And may Jehovah continue to bless you and all of the hard work that you do in behalf of his name.
Thank you very much, Brother Turner. We really appreciated that. So my quick notes, don't change the change.
Continue to make the right change.
Good. Well, now we have the privilege of listening to the member of the governing body, Brother Kenneth Cook.
And Brother Cook is going to talk to us on the theme, find joy in Jehovah's gradual blessing.
As you know from your own life experience and from your Gilead instruction, Jehovah is a God of action.
And as such, he does some things quickly, doesn't he?
And that's so true when it's needed or it's warranted, he makes sure it happens just at the right time.
For example, when a sudden stiff breeze rushed into the upper room at Pentecost, those present were filled with Holy Spirit.
In another example, the Bible tells us that when this world in some way says that it has achieved peace and security, what happens next.
First Thessalonians 5 and verse 3 says that sudden destruction will come instantly on them.
But not all things that Jehovah causes to happen occur so quickly.
In fact, he often does things gradually.
Let's look at two examples and see what we can learn from them.
First we will look at the angels and creation and then resurrected ones and perfection.
Finally, we will look at how this applies to you and how you can find great joy in a gradual blessing.
We begin with the angels who were on hand when Jehovah made the earth and all the things in it.
What did the angels see? Did they see an instant burst of unimaginable power that suddenly formed the earth and all life on it?
Not at all. Jehovah could have done that.
But instead he created things gradually.
Job chapter 38 and verses 5 and 6 speak of him as setting the earth's measurements, sinking its pedestals and laying its cornerstone.
And in Genesis chapters 1 and 2, we also read about how he gradually brought forth life on earth and ultimately humans.
Imagine the joy that his angelic sons experienced as they watched what Jehovah was gradually doing.
For example, undoubtedly the angels could see that their Heavenly Father received great satisfaction from a job well done.
They would also learn about facets of Jehovah's marvelous personality as they observed everything from the first whale breaching the surface of an ocean to a hummingbird hovering over a beautiful flower or seeing lion cubs playing together.
So stupendous was Jehovah's work and so enriching this experience for his angelic sons that Job chapter 38 and verse 7 tells us that at some point on seeing all of this and seeing the earth formed they began shouting in applause.
That gradual blessing is something that the faithful angels will never forget.
In fact, God's Word tells us that the angels are still focused on what Jehovah is doing in the earth especially with regard to his people.
First Peter chapter 1 and verse 12 says that into these very things angels are desiring to peer.
So then do the angels find pleasure in Jehovah's gradual work and blessing, yes they do.
And aren't we grateful that they love Jehovah so much as well as each one of us?
What do we learn from their response to Jehovah's gradual work?
We learn to treasure every moment in Jehovah's service and to be grateful for every opportunity we have to learn more about him.
So be like the angels and in effect shout in applause at each new thing you learn about our Heavenly Father.
Take time to meditate on his works, on his Word of Truth, and on his indescribable mercy toward us through his Son.
In our next example we look to the future but not too far into the future.
We're talking about the resurrection, specifically resurrection and perfection.
When Jehovah through his Son resurrects countless millions to life again in the new world they will not all come back at the same time nor will they come back in perfection.
But Jehovah will bring them back in such a way that they will know themselves, they will recognize themselves.
Although their serious infirmities will be gone, they will instantly know their own familiar thoughts and feelings, they will know who they are as a person.
Imagine the joy that such ones will have as they apply what they learn and then see the progress that they are making day after day in serving Jehovah.
They will experience the words of Proverbs 10 and verse 22 coming true for them.
Please follow along where it says in verse 22,
it is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich and he adds no pain with it.
So what is God's or will God's gradual blessing do for such ones at that time?
His blessing will make them rich in the most important way of all and that is spiritually things that they struggle to be able to overcome in this old world under man's control and Satan's influence.
They will be able to overcome because they loved Jehovah and he will help them to do so.
But even more than this, in the new world, millions and millions of people will come to experience physical vitality and strength that exceeds anything imaginable today.
Jehovah's gradual blessing will take hold and grateful ones will rejoice day after day.
Also important is the fact that as each person grows toward perfection, they will keep hold of the empathy needed to teach and help still others who will come back in a gradual resurrection.
How can contemplating such future blessings benefit us, benefit you right now?
We benefit when we patiently focus on Jehovah and how he often fulfills his promises in a gradual way.
Having this in mind keeps us grounded, you could say, we do our best but we do not expect everything right now, do we?
Especially perfection, that is yet in the future.
However, when we develop strong faith, we will find joy no matter what we will yet face. Why?
Because we are absolutely certain that Jehovah's promises will come true right on time.
Now we get to the part that especially involves you.
As one graduating from Gilea School, you may look back on the past five months and worry that you did not do everything perfectly.
I know that's how I would feel, but please don't focus on that.
Instead imagine the joy that you will find as you patiently apply the things that you have learned and then you see Jehovah's gradual blessing on your efforts.
Remember, a head full of knowledge is not what brings Jehovah's blessing, what matters is what we do with what we know.
Consider the example of King Solomon.
First King is chapter 4 and verse 32 says that he composed 3,000 Proverbs and 1,000 and 5 solos.
But there was a disconnect between what was in his mind and what was really driving him from the heart.
And as a result, Solomon drifted away from Jehovah, didn't he?
The Bible tells us that his foreign wives gradually inclined his heart away from Jehovah so you could say that he in effect substituted one gradual thing for another gradual thing.
In turn, he lost the opportunity to find joy in Jehovah's gradual blessing.
Now, in contrast to that example, make it your heart's desire to be like the faithful angels.
Although they undoubtedly know far more than 3,000 Proverbs and songs, they savor every morsel that they learn about our magnificent Heavenly Father.
And again, as you look to the future, to the real life, take what you have learned in this beautiful schooling and humbly work for the interests of others.
Jehovah will bless that effort and the gradual blessing that you will enjoy will serve as a taste of what is yet ahead in God's new world.
Keep in mind that those who find joy now in a gradual blessing will have no problem in patiently waiting for and then enjoying the gradual blessings that are still to come.
Thank you very much, Brother Cook. We truly appreciated those fine comments.
I just had a brief note here.
Expect the unexpected gradually. Well, I'm sure we all got that point.
And we'll enjoy looking forward to seeing that program at that talk again and going through the main points.
Now, for your students, you're about to be addressed by one of your instructors from Gilead.
You've heard from Brother Kothwin a number of times and now he's going to address you this final time on this intriguing theme, shoulder to shoulder.
By the spring of 1945, Allied and Russian armies were converging upon Germany.
The Nazis were losing the war. The Germans gave the ominous order. March all the concentration camp prisoners west and destroy all the evidence of the horrors that had taken place in those camps.
On the 20th of April, the evacuation of Saxon House began.
The plan was to march the prisoners to the Baltic coast, ship them out to sea and drown them.
And if that wasn't horrific enough, the SS guards had explicit orders to shoot any of the prisoners who couldn't keep up.
Already in a weakened state, hundreds were shot along the way, while many thousands more died of exposure, starvation and exhaustion.
Thus began what came to be known as a death march. Interestingly, the Saxon House and evacuation included 230 of our brothers.
And just like the other prisoners, they were in no shape to make this journey physically.
But they were more than up to the journey spiritually.
How so? To open your Bibles, if you would, to a promise Jehovah made, it's found in Zephaniah chapter 3 and verse 9.
And here he promised to give to his people a pure language, and the point being so that they could do what?
The latter part of that verse says, to serve him shoulder to shoulder, or as the footnote says, in unity.
And that was the key. The secret weapon was their shoulder to shoulder unity.
Even the weak become strong when they are united.
Now today you and I are on a march for life.
And never forget that we're not marching alone. We have our brothers and sisters from all backgrounds and all ages along with us for the journey.
But the question is, are we marching shoulder to shoulder?
What can we learn from our brothers who went through this death march?
Well, first of all, to reach the coast, the Saxon House and prisoners were to march 155 miles. That's 250 kilometers.
And throughout that journey, the witnesses pooled all their food supplies into one small bundle that was used for the benefit of all.
Now you can imagine that sharing food is not an easy thing to do when you've already been starved and you're very weak.
But our brothers knew Bible principles, such as one of Proverbs 11, 25 that says the generous person will prosper and whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed.
So what's the lesson for us today? The lesson is this, unity to be real must withstand the severest test.
Being a true Christian is more than a commitment to God. It is a commitment to other Christians as well.
So don't hold back. Show a generous disposition in your assignment.
And remember, one of the most important resources that you can share with others is your time.
So learn the balance. Take time with others who may need it. And don't be ruled by time, rather than rush, refresh.
Second point, when the SS guards gave the witnesses a card to haul, that easily could have seemed like just another burden to bear.
But instead, our brothers were thrilled. Why? Because they saw it as an opportunity. How so?
Well, during the journey, the sick and elderly ones were able to set on top of the card and rest for a while.
And then when one would get his strength back, another one would replace him.
And so in a very real way, they carried one another.
Lesson for us. Where there is unity, there is victory.
And in the middle of difficulty lies opportunity. So look for opportunities to encourage one another.
The word encourage literally means to make strong or to hearten.
Being spiritual people, we may not lose our hope, but we could lose heart, especially during times of extreme crisis or grief.
But something as simple as a reassuring word or even a kind deed can work like a miracle.
It can restore the weary soul. It can carry others through a hard time.
So the point is this. You're not responsible for every one in the Christian congregation, but you are responsible to them.
Jehovah expects us to do whatever we can to help our brothers. We simply cannot allow ourselves to be separated in interest or divided in purpose.
And then one more point. On their last night, the prisoners were stopped near for us.
The SS guards encouraged everyone to walk across the freedom.
Imagine you were there. It must have seemed very tempting.
But naturally, they were unsure of what to do. So they prayed for guidance.
And unitedly, they decided to stay put. Now one of them left the group.
Later it was learned that those had accepted the offer. We're shot down.
The lesson for us. Don't allow anything or anyone to cause division.
Satan is the master of divide and conquer. We must stand together until forever.
When problems arise, use your energy. You can use your energy for retaliation or resolution, but not both.
The Bible says, have intense love for one another. So don't allow differences to develop into distance and don't nurture past offenses.
Brotherhood is a place where mistakes are not rubbed in, but rubbed out to recap.
We serve God in part, brothers, by serving others.
Willingly share your resources with one another, especially your time.
It's in times of deep crisis and grief and doubt that we need each other the most.
When you see a brother or sister's shoulders beginning to droop, pull out your cart for them.
Do what is needed, even if it's difficult or inconvenient.
Remember, our actions reveal what's in our heart, whether we like it or not.
Have intense love for one another.
Remain united in heart and mind. Continue committed to one another as you are to Jehovah God and Jesus Christ.
And finally, there is beauty and power in unity.
Jehovah is creating a new world, brothers and sisters, a new world, one world, one people, a new world society of unified worshipers.
Stay focused on that fact. In conclusion, over 10,700 lost their lives on that infamous death march from Saxonhausen.
But not one, not one of our 230 brothers lost their life. Why?
Well, let's let them tell us in their own words.
Here's a quotation from a resolution made by our brothers in that forest just before their freedom.
I quote, a long hard time of trial is behind us.
And we have been brought forth from the fiery furnace without a scent of the fire upon us.
On the contrary, we are full of power and strength in Jehovah.
We have only one desire after our stay in the lion's stand.
We will serve Jehovah throughout eternity.
This would be our most precious reward.
And sign your co-fighters for Jehovah's holy name.
You see, they didn't pretend to be brothers. They were brothers.
They functioned as one united family throughout the whole ordeal, and they were victorious.
And so as this world grows colder and colder, brothers, let us be more determined than ever to serve our God,
shoulder to shoulder.
Thank you so much, brother Kothrun. There were so many excellent points in that talk.
What did I write down to remind me? Shoulder to shoulder.
I did also write down those imperfections, don't rub in, rub out.
Well, there's a lot of good points that your dear students soon to be graduates are taking down, I'm sure.
Now you're going to listen to another brother who's very familiar to you, one of your instructors.
But the difference is this time, you're not going to be looking at him and thinking of written exercises.
But you're going to be thinking, well, I can sit back and enjoy these comments.
Brother Mark Numer, a helper with the teaching committee, as well as an instructor of Gilead,
now talk to you on the theme, four words to live by.
Can there really be four words that you can base your life on?
And if so, what would they be?
Well, we look to our exemplar Christ Jesus for the answer.
We focus on the night before his death.
The future of every human being rested upon his shoulders.
His words, his actions, his very thoughts in these critical moments
will be remembered for thousands of years.
What would he give the world to remember?
He left no room for guesswork.
In one verse, one verse, Jesus reveals what governs his every action, his decision in one verse.
Four words, four words that he lived by.
And we encourage you to live by these four words.
We encourage you to take these four words to heart.
Take them seriously.
They're found in John chapter 14 and verse 31.
John 14, 31, last night of Jesus' life.
But for the world to know that I love the Father, I love the Father.
In these four words, we find the most powerful bond in the universe.
An unbreakable bond of love between Jesus and his Father.
And it is this unbreakable attachment that enabled Jesus to unselfishly defend his Father's reputation to his dying breath,
trusting that your hope would protect and resurrect him.
I love the Father.
But how did this love develop?
How did this unbreakable bond, this attachment of love develop?
Well, the only begotten Son was created perfect, true.
However, was he created with love already fully developed? No.
He was created with a free will. Satan was created with a free will.
And the capacity to extend in large and enrich this love.
The Son of God was not created with an unselfish self-sacrificing love already fully in place.
What did he have to do?
He had to cultivate this deep attachment for his Father, cultivate this deep love.
How did he do that?
By observing his Father's personality.
In his pre-human existence, imagine how the Son would do this.
He would observe closely how his Father used his power, how he used his authority, how he used his strength.
In behalf of people, those crushed, those lowly in spirit.
He would observe how his Father used his power to help those crushed in spirit.
He watched his Father deal with Ruth, the mobile girl, a mobile girl from a pagan nation.
Might he have thought, now, mobile girl?
Weren't these the mobile women?
Weren't these the very women that lowered the Israelite men into immorality right on the threshold of the promised land?
True.
But his Father saw this girl was different.
She was different. What a lesson for the Son of God.
His Father did not put people in categories. He did not stereotype individuals.
Oh, that's the mobile, I'm not going to deal with her.
No. Jehovah God looked at Ruth as an individual.
And the Son's love must have grown.
As now he allows this girl, he allows a Bible book to be named in behalf of her Ruth,
as opposed to Naomi or Boaz.
Ruth, a mobile girl.
That's right.
And the Son's love would have continued to grow when he observed how his Father then allowed this girl to become an ancestors to the Messiah.
But watching and admiring his Father wasn't enough, he went further.
As the Son continued to develop appreciation for his Father's qualities, this bond of love became more than just a feeling.
No, his love for his Father began to shape his decisions and actions.
And Jesus demonstrated this when he was on earth.
He didn't just say the words, I love the Father.
He didn't just feel the words, feel I love the Father's cozy warm little feeling.
No, no, no. He lived those words.
And that is why Jesus could say in the second half of John 1431,
I am doing just as the Father has commanded me to do.
I am doing, you see.
His entire life course proved that he loved the Father.
For example, when a sireo Phoenician woman begged Jesus to cure her demonized daughter.
Initially, Jesus says, no, I was sent forth not to the Gentiles, but to the Jews.
But the woman would not give up in showing her face. She kept asking and asking.
So in light of this exceptional circumstance, Jesus could see this was no time to enforce a general rule or to stereotype people,
to become inflexible, to put her in a category, oh no, your agenda, your sireo Phoenician, no, no.
Now Jesus saw this was a time to bend in response to higher principles.
Did he remember how his Father handled that situation with Ruth?
And this moved him to my father did that with Ruth.
Now we have a similar situation.
What would my Father want me to do?
Jesus helps the sireo Phoenician woman.
He was ready to act in imitation of his Father's love.
Another example would be what Jesus learned from his Father about forgiveness.
He watched his Father forgive, forgive people.
He watched his Father forgive David for adultery, forgive David for the murder of Euryah.
How many others did the Son of God watch?
How many others did he watch his Father forgive?
The Hebrew Scriptures are replete with Jehovah forgiving people.
He's a large-hearted forgiver. He's ready to forgive. He's on the lookout to forgive.
That's what the Son of God learned.
So this no doubt helped him to deal with the frequency of the imperfections of the apostles and others.
Jesus viewed forgiving others as an opportunity to imitate his Father.
Another opportunity to allow his actions to declare loud and clear like Father, like Son.
He didn't just say, I love the Father, didn't just feel it.
He lived it.
Now we take this discussion out of the classroom and apply it to your real-life situations.
Right after Jesus said, I love the Father.
He said, get up. Let us go from here.
Well soon you're going to get up and you're going to go from here.
And you don't know what tests of faith are going to come upon you. You don't know.
We can't anticipate every test that's going to come upon us of faith.
However, if you know these four words, you know enough, etch these four words.
I love the Father on your minds and on your hearts.
Let these four words govern every decision and action of yours.
For example, if you're entrusted with authority, how will you treat people?
How will you treat those under you? Learn from Jesus on this last night.
His words could have been all about Himself for the world to know that I am the Son of God.
The first born of all creation, I am the second greatest personage in the universe.
Or he could have said, I plan to surrender my life for you as in the ransom sacrifice for you.
Or I am the one who fulfills all prophecy.
But none of these thoughts were about Himself, His authority or His accomplishments.
So like Jesus, don't focus on your position.
Show by your dealings with others that your heartfelt desire and motives are to please your Heavenly Father.
That's what you want to do.
So as you go from here, who will be your Ruth?
Show. You don't put people in categories.
Show it. Instead of that department, that nationality holds that language group, those sisters.
Who will be your sireo-finition woman?
See's opportunities to be more flexible and reasonable.
Dissurn. When it will be a time to bend in response to higher principles.
Rather than always being on the lookout to check and correct, work hard to acquire thinking ability.
Thinking ability that will assist you to respond to higher principles.
Developing thinking ability is not easy.
Because as you begin to think about a person, often your emotional reactions toward that person start interfering.
You begin registering likes, dislikes, respect, disrespect, trust, distrust, reacting emotionally before beginning an intellectual appraisal.
But if you make decisions solely based on feelings that have slipped in under the guise of thoughts, this often leads to poor decisions.
So listen to what I'm going to tell you right now.
Ask yourself, will my decision making process?
Will it be in response to higher principles or simply because I do or don't like the person?
When it's a response to higher principles, now your strengthening and stabilizing the organization.
Who will be your imperfect, disappointing apostles?
Be on the lookout for opportunities to be more forgiving, more patient with the shortcomings of others.
Maybe you're an overseer and your imperfect, disappointing apostles will be those working under you.
For others, it might be a fellow translator or a work made in your department that disappoints you.
If this happens, will these four words govern your thinking?
They did for one sister. This is what she says.
Something that happened in my department hurt me deeply, and it shook me to my very core.
And since then, I struggle with constant feelings of inadequacy.
I felt completely discouraged and dried up.
However, I'm not a quitter. I will cling to Jehovah and not let go.
I love Jehovah above everything, and I'm sure that I will overcome my negative feelings and will become stronger spiritually and mentally.
She just didn't say the words, I love the Father.
She lived those words, four words that gave her a proper perspective and balance in life.
So it comes down to this, when you cherish Jehovah's approval and your unbreakable bond of love for him,
and this spiritual relationship overrides, supersedes our human sphere of activity, not much else matters.
How do you reach that point?
By thinking deeply on Jehovah's way of doing things, then loving those ways and then imitating your Heavenly Father.
At John 13, 15, Jesus said, I set the pattern for you.
And it's a pattern that we are confident that you will follow.
Like Jesus, show the world. It's your opportunity now to show the world that you two can meet any challenge and test the faith that comes your way.
We know you can do it. We have confidence in you. Why do we know you can do it?
Because you are clothed with the most unbreakable bond in the universe and empowered by the unfailing four words to live by, I love the Father.
Well, even though you were able to listen to Brother Nameh and not have a written exercise afterwards, I'm sure like me, you wrote down those four words, I love the Father.
Thank you very much, Brother Nameh. We really appreciate it that.
And truly, there's been a abundance of good points that we've learned from the program so far.
And then all of a sudden I realized this program is going to be broadcast on JW Broadcasting in 163 languages so I don't have to take notes after all.
What an exciting and upbuilding program. And don't forget to tune in later this month for parts two and three of this special event.
To conclude, we'd like to share greetings from Taiwan.
Taiwan is a southeast Asian island over 35,000 square kilometers or nearly 13,000 square miles in size.
It's densely populated with over 23 million inhabitants.
The first westerner who saw this island named it Ilya Formosa or Island Beautiful and it's not hard to see why.
Taiwan has a beautiful coastline, fertile land and majestic mountains covered in thick, luxuriant forests.
The majority of the population lives on the narrow coastal plains where you'll find large bustling cities.
Manufacturing and exporting various goods drives the economy in Taiwan.
The official language of Taiwan is Mandarin Chinese.
However, there are also 16 recognized indigenous language groups.
One of the languages that our brothers reach out to is Amis.
In January 2018, the Amis Remote Translation Office was open in Quailin City.
They translate written publications and produce audio publications in Amis.
In the Hualien Amis congregation, there are 80 publishers.
Five serve as elders and 22 are regular pioneers.
They conduct over 70 Bible studies each month.
These brothers search out Amis speaking people in Hualien City where they live alongside Chinese and men non-speaking people.
In the mountains, Amis speaking people are more isolated.
So our brothers travel long distances using scooters to share the good news with them.
The brothers and sisters in the Hualien Amis congregation send you their warm love.
From the headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses, this is JW Broadcasting.